# testing custom hooks

## Background

Testing custom hooks is a common question as well. Step back and think about how
our guiding testing principle applies to this situation: the more your tests
resemble the way your software is used, the more confidence they can give you.
How is your custom hook used? It's used in a component! So that's how it should
be tested.

Often, the easiest and most straightforward way to test a custom hook is to
create a component that uses it and then test that component instead.

## Exercise

In this exercise, we have gone back to our simple counter, except now that logic
is all in a custom hook and we need to test that functionality. To do that,
we'll make a test component that uses the hook in the typical way that our hook
will be used and then test that component, indirectly testing our hook.

## Extra Credit

### 1. 💯 fake component

Sometimes it's hard to write a test component without making a pretty
complicated "TestComponent." For those situations, you can try something like
this:

```javascript
let result
function TestComponent(props) {
  result = useCustomHook(props)
  return null
}

// interact with and assert on results here
```

Learn more about this approach from my blog post:
[How to test custom React hooks](https://kentcdodds.com/blog/how-to-test-custom-react-hooks)

### 2. 💯 setup function

Add tests titled:

1. allows customization of the initial count
2. allows customization of the step

And test those use cases. Then abstract away the common logic into a `setup`
function. This one might be a little tricky thanks to variable references, but I
know you can do it!

💰 Here's a little tip. Due to variable references, you'll need to change your
test component a bit:

```javascript
const results = {}
function TestComponent(props) {
  Object.assign(results, useCustomHook())
  return null
}

// interact with and assert on results here
```

### 3. 💯 using react-hooks testing library

Your `setup` function is very similar to the `renderHook` function from
[`@testing-library/react`](https://github.com/testing-library/react-testing-library)!
Swap your own `setup` function with that!

> NOTE: Originally this exercise used `@testing-library/react-hooks` which was
> similar, but that functionality was merged directly into
> `@testing-library/react` so you're going to use that instead.

## 🦉 Elaboration and Feedback

After the instruction, if you want to remember what you've just learned, then
fill out the elaboration and feedback form:

Do not forget about the guiding testing principle: ‘the more your tests resemble the way your software is used, the more confidence they can give you.’
Most of the time we need to test custom hooks in a tested components as custom hooks are often consumed there. However, it’s possible (not advisable) to test custom hooks.
Ways to test custom hooks:

1. Create a test component that uses the hook and test that component
2. If there’s a customization needed when calling a hook, it’s better to create a function like in the screenshot below (check notes)
Or this for some cases when it’s difficult to create component to resemble how the hook is used and when no customization required (check notes)
3. Use renderHook from the React Testing Library https://testing-library.com/docs/react-testing-library/api/#renderhook

Note, you can test more than a single hook by simply calling all the hooks you want in the callback function you pass to renderHook.
const {result} = renderHook(useCounter) vs  const {result} = renderHook(() => useCounter({initialCount: 2, step: 2}))  when we need to pass args, we can make the callback to be called to call the hook. In the first case, we don’t need it to be called with any args, so we can pass it as is and it’ll be called by the renderHook

https://ws.kcd.im/?ws=Testing%20React%20Applications%20%F0%9F%A7%90&e=08%3A%20testing%20custom%20hooks&em=
